All right.
So let's get into the question of how linear functions are changing.
In fact it's very easy to do to determine how a straight line is changing.
We'll work with a concept which you know already which is called slope or just good old slope.
I know you're getting those fifth grade memories back.
All right.
Slope
measures.
A linear function is changing.
And what is slope Exactly.
Well if you remember from middle school slope equals
rise over run.
Remember that if you don't remember that's OK we'll go into the concept a little bit more deeply now.
But in general that's how they taught it back in middle school slope equals rise over run.
Now what exactly does that mean.
So remember how we said that the graph of a linear function is always a line.
Well it turns out that lines have slopes.
What is this slope again.
Slope is a measure of how linear function is changing.
In other words a slope is a measure
of the inclination of the line.
Which line then line that you get when you graph the function.
So for example
this is our cartesian plane.
Let's say we have this function here.
All right.
The graph is a straight line.
So we know it's a linear function.
Now let's say that we have this other function here.
Now let's get one more function over here.
So what are all these.
Well these are all graphs of linear functions.
We know that because they are straight lines even though they're going in different directions.
It doesn't matter.
And each of these lines has a different slope.
Why.
Because each of these lines has a different inclination.
So for example this one has a certain slope.
However this one here with kind of like greenish blue color has a steeper slope right because it goes
higher.
So if you compare this from left to right which is this one looks like it's harder to climb.
Right.
It's a lot steeper even more.
This one here the green one is going in the opposite direction.
So it has a completely different slope.
The point is that each line has a slope and the slope measures the rate of change of that line.
In other words it measures the rate of change of a linear function.
So whenever you have a linear function and you want to know how it's changing you're going to do it
with slope and you might be thinking OK this is all nice and dandy but what is rate of change.
Anyways what does that mean.
Well let's go back to our lemonade stand that we mentioned already.
Let's say that on a really good day I calculate that I'm selling five lemonades per hour
starting at 9:00 in the morning.
This means that at 10
I will have sold 5 lemonades right one hour later at 11 I will have sold how many 10 because it's the
five that I originally had at 10 plus five more that I make every hour.
Plus five more that I sell every hour.
What about a 12.
It's noon.
Everybody's thirsty but still I sell 15.
So at 10 I will have sold 5 or 11 I will have sold 10 and 12 I will have sold 15.
So what's the pattern here.
The pattern here is that every hour that passes we sell five lemonades and that's what's called a constant
rate of change.
OK.
We know it's constant because I'm not selling 7 at one hour and then 10 and then 15 and then 27 and
then 33.
I'm only selling five.
Every single hour the number of lemonades I'm selling every single hour is the same it's always five.
That's why it's constant constant means that it doesn't change.
So what is the function for this.
Well think about it
so I can say OK let me get a function for this.
That tells me how many lemonades have sold X hours after 9.
What would that be.
Well I sell five an hour x y 5 X because X is a number of hours after 9:00.
So if I plug in one here it's one hour after 9:00 so it's 10 and 10.
I have sold five.
So it's just five times one right.
Which is five.
This matches what we have here.
What about 11.
We plug into because it's two hours after 9:00 9:00 plus two hours.
It's 11:00 and we plug in here five an hour times two hours.
We have sold 10 which again matches with what we have here at 10:00 in the morning.
Our have sold 10 lemonades even though the glasses of lemonade I sell because they accumulate I have
first five and then 10 and then 15.
But the actual rate of change how many lemonades I'm selling every hour.
That's not changing.
It is always five.
That's why this problem is given by this function f of x equals 5 x.
So now let's figure out how to measure the slope of a linear function.
All right so going back to slope we know that slope is
rise over run.
Let's figure out what that means right now.
So let's pick our example again that we have f of x equals 5 x and let's try to get some slope.
So remember that to graph a linear function.
All you need is two points.
So let's build the table here.
It's X and Y and let's get two points.
So first of all let's plug in
so five times one is five.
So our first point is one five.
And then let's plug in zero just to make it easy.
Five times zero is just zero.
So our second point is actually zero zero.
Very convenient.
So let's try to grab this right here.
All right so our first point is 1 5.
So we move one to the right because x is positive and 5 up because the Y is positive as well.
And then our second point is 0 0.
This is called the origin.
By the way to the point 0 0 is called The Origin and we put that here for you 0 0 is origin.
All right.
So we have two points because it's a linear function.
We can just draw a line through them and we'll will have the graph over function.
All right there we go.
That is the graph of f of x equals 5 x linear function.
The graph is a line.
So what is the slope the slope is right.
Overrun.
So remember right over overrun means how many units are you going up per every unit that you move to
the right Lemme repeat that again.
How many units are you going up for every unit that you move to the right.
So let's start at the origin.
We move one to the right and five up there we move one to the right again and five up one to the right
again and five up.
So you see how we always move one to the right and the same amount of units up.
That means that the slope of this function is five because you're right five for every run that you
make to the right
slope.
In this case equals five.
So the rate of change of this function is also five because remember that slope measures rate of change.
All right.
So is there some sort of formula that we could use for slope instead of having to go through this graph
and try to guess you know how many you move to the right for every one that you go up instead of trying
to guess how many go up for everyone you move to the right.
Yes there is a formula for slope and the formula is
lied to.
Line is why one over x 2 Mine is x 1.
That is the formula for slope.
So what does that mean.
It means you're going to pick two points.
So your first point is going to be x y y 1 and x 2 y 2 and you're going to plug them in into this function
to get to slope.
So basically to get the slope of a linear function all you need to do is get two points as if you were
going to graph it and plug them in here.
So let's pick the point that we just work with which where 00
and one five Let's plug them into this formula for slope.
So every time you have two points it really doesn't matter which one is point one.
Point two but you have to be consistent.
So if x one is one then why one has to be the corresponding y or this could be point 1.
But then the corresponding y has to be zero.
You see what I mean.
So for example let's say that for example this is point 1.
And this is point 2.
So this is X1 y one and the point below is x to y 2.
So let's plug into this formula.
So we have y to so the y of point 2 which is 5 minus.
Why one so why one is the y value of the first point which is zero.
Over X 2 which is the x value of point number 2 which is 1 mine is the x value of the first point which
is x y in this case it is 0.
And I hope you see where this is going.
5.0 0 5 one minus zero is 1 rice over 1 5 or 1 is just 5.
This is the slope of this function which again also measures the rate of change of the linear function.